July 2010What hard liquor, cigarettes, heroin, and crack have in common is
that they're all more concentrated forms of less addictive predecessors.The best thing to do in San Francisco is eat a sandwich and sit in Dolores Park on a sunny day.
Most if not all the things we describe as addictive are.  And the
scary thing is, the process that created them is accelerating.We wouldn't want to stop it.  It's the same process that cures
diseases: technological progress.  Technological progress means
making things do more of what we want.  When the thing we want is
something we want to want, we consider technological progress good.
If some new technique makes solar cells x% more efficient, that
seems strictly better.  When progress concentrates something we
don't want to want—when it transforms opium into heroin—it seems
bad.  But it's the same process at work.
[1]No one doubts this process is accelerating, which means increasing
numbers of things we like will be transformed into things we like
too much.
[2]As far as I know there's no word for something we like too much.
The closest is the colloquial sense of "addictive." That usage has
become increasingly common during my lifetime.  And it's clear why:
there are an increasing number of things we need it for.  At the
extreme end of the spectrum are crack and meth.  Food has been
transformed by a combination of factory farming and innovations in
food processing into something with way more immediate bang for the
buck, and you can see the results in any town in America.  Checkers
and solitaire have been replaced by World of Warcraft and FarmVille.
TV has become much more engaging, and even so it can't compete with Facebook.The world is more addictive than it was 40 years ago.   And unless
the forms of technological progress that produced these things are
subject to different laws than technological progress in general,
the world will get more addictive in the next 40 years than it did
in the last 40.The next 40 years will bring us some wonderful things.  I don't
mean to imply they're all to be avoided.  Alcohol is a dangerous
drug, but I'd rather live in a world with wine than one without.
Most people can coexist with alcohol; but you have to be careful.
More things we like will mean more things we have to be careful
about.Most people won't, unfortunately.  Which means that as the world
becomes more addictive, the two senses in which one can live a
normal life will be driven ever further apart.  One sense of "normal"
is statistically normal: what everyone else does.  The other is the
sense we mean when we talk about the normal operating range of a
piece of machinery: what works best.These two senses are already quite far apart.  Already someone
trying to live well would seem eccentrically abstemious in most of
the US.  That phenomenon is only going to become more pronounced.
You can probably take it as a rule of thumb from now on that if
people don't think you're weird, you're living badly.Societies eventually develop antibodies to addictive new things.
I've seen that happen with cigarettes.  When cigarettes first
appeared, they spread the way an infectious disease spreads through
a previously isolated population.  Smoking rapidly became a
(statistically) normal thing.  There were ashtrays everywhere.  We
had ashtrays in our house when I was a kid, even though neither of
my parents smoked.  You had to for guests.As knowledge spread about the dangers of smoking, customs changed.
In the last 20 years, smoking has been transformed from something
that seemed totally normal into a